---
title: "Pheromone-based sampling for conservation: determining the habitat requirements of *Tragosoma depsarium*"
collection: talks
type: "Conference presentation"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "ISCE meeting 2018"
date: 2018-08-14
location: "Budapest, Hungary"
---

Changes in forest management regimes have during the last centuries turned Swedish
forests increasingly more homogeneous, mostly dominated by dense and young spruce
stands. This has led to the disappearance of many previously common habitats with complex
effects on biodiversity. Insects, which as a group constitutes a large proportion of forest
biodiversity have often been underrepresented in habitat surveys, often due to difficult and
expensive survey methods. During recent years pheromone based survey methods has started
to ameliorate these problems by allowing for large scale studies of threatened insects.
  *Tragosoma depsarium* is a saproxylic beetle spending its larval stage inside logs of old
*Pinus sylvestris* trees. The species was previously common in large parts of Sweden but has
declined during the last century and is today considered Near Threatened on the Swedish
Red List. Although a large characteristic beetle, not much is known about its habitat
requirements and dispersal capacity. To investigate this a study of *T. depsarium* occurrence
was performed on a regional scale with 162 investigated potential habitats in the Swedish
counties of Kalmar and Östergötland. A mark and recapture study was simultaneously
conducted in a hotspot area in Kalmar county.
  By combining, at the sites locally measured, habitat characteristics and satellite based
forest volume GIS data, models explaining species presence were created. The most
important explanatory variables seemed to be the volume of *P. sylvestris* in a three km
radius, the density of trees around the traps and the number of logs within 100 m of the traps.
The mark and recapture study showed movements of up to almost 4 km and indicated large
beneficial effects of targeted conservation efforts on the population abundance of *T.
depsarium*. 
