---
title: "Spatial and Temporal Substrate Dynamics - Critical factors for Saproxylic Forest Biodiversity"
collection: talks
type: "Conference presentation, accepted, postponed until 2021"
permalink: /talks/2020-07-ICE
venue: "XXVI International Congress of Entomology"
date:
location: "Helsinki, Finland"
---

During the last century great changes have taken place in the forest landscape with an ever more focused industry optimized for high yields. In Sweden, forests have become more homogenized and dominated by young, dense tree stands that are thinned and harvested at regular intervals. These changes has happened at the expense of many previously common forest habitats and often disrupted century long stand continuities. The effects of these changes on forest biodiversity have historically been challenging to examine, to a large extent due to laborious survey methods for many saproxylic insect species. Utilizing pheromone-based trapping methods it is however possible to conduct efficient, systematic surveys over both large spatial and temporal scales. 

During the last few years we have used pheromone baited traps to compare populations of different taxa of threatened saproxylic longhorn beetles on over 200 localities across southern Sweden. By combining systematic trap catches, mark-recapture studies with GIS analyses of landscape data we found stark contrasts in the responses to modern forestry by different groups of longhorn beetles. Transient species, relying on thinner and freshly dead wood, seem to exist on a landscape scale where they quickly can utilize available substrate, i.e. after forest management actions, and then move on with little regard for forest continuity. Other more perpetual species, specialized on later succession stages, are more dependent on long-term habitat persistence in their immediate vicinity and seem to quickly disappear after a breach in continuity. These different responses will require different conservation approaches if we are to maintain a rich forest biodiversity in the future.
